src/result/readme.md, before:

# Result

The `Result` type is a monadic alternative to throwing exceptions for expressing the result of operations that may succeed or fail. It provides a way to handle errors in an expressive and type-safe manner without relying on exception handling.

Code that throws exceptions when operations fail has a couple shortcomings:

1. It forces all calling code to handle exceptions, even when they may not be equipped to do so meaningfully.
2. Exception types are not captured in function signatures, making it difficult to know what errors a function might produce.
3. Stack unwinding from exceptions can be expensive and makes control flow less predictable.

`Result` addresses these issues by wrapping either a successful value or an error in a way that makes error handling explicit and composable. It provides expressive methods that encapsulate error checking, making it possible to write robust code that gracefully handles failure cases without repetitive try-catch blocks.

# The `Result` interface

`Result` is fully documented inline. The best way to view its documentation is in your editor, while using it. You can also view the documentation for each method [in this source code](./result.ts).

Here's an overview of the `Result` interface:

```ts result.ts
// Interface definition that can be used for type annotations.
export interface Result<ResultType, ErrorType extends Error> {
  // Check if the result contains an error. If it does, it will be widened to include an `error` property.
  is_error(): this is ErrorResult<ErrorType>;

  // Check if the result contains a value. If it does, it will be widened to include a `value` property.
  is_ok(): this is OkResult<ResultType>;

  // If the result is Ok, return the value. Otherwise, return the provided default value.
  value_or(value_if_error: ResultType): ResultType;

  // If the result is Error, return the error. Otherwise, return the provided default error.
  error_or(error_if_ok: ErrorType): ErrorType;

  // If the result is Ok, map the value and return a new Result with the mapped value.
  // Otherwise, return the error unchanged.
  map<NewResultType>(
    fn: (value: ResultType) => NewResultType,
  ): Result<NewResultType, ErrorType>;

  // If the result is Error, map the error and return a new Result with the mapped error.
  // Otherwise, return the value unchanged.
  map_err<NewErrorType extends Error>(
    fn: (error: ErrorType) => NewErrorType,
  ): Result<ResultType, NewErrorType>;


  // Pattern match against the result, returning the result of the appropriate callback.
  match<OKMatchResultType, ErrorMatchResultType>({
    on_ok,
    on_error,
  }: {
    on_ok: (value: ResultType) => OKMatchResultType;
    on_error: (error: ErrorType) => ErrorMatchResultType;
  }): OKMatchResultType | ErrorMatchResultType;

  // If this Result is Ok, apply the function to the value. Otherwise, return the error unchanged.
  and_then<NewResultType>(
    fn: (value: ResultType) => Result<NewResultType, ErrorType>,
  ): Result<NewResultType, ErrorType>;

  // Provide an alternative Result if this Result is Error.
  or_else<NewErrorType extends Error>(
    fn: (error: ErrorType) => Result<ResultType, NewErrorType>,
  ): Result<ResultType, NewErrorType>;

  // Iterator support - yields the value if Ok, nothing if Error.
  [Symbol.iterator](): Generator<ResultType, void, unknown>;
}

export const result = {
  ok, // constructs a `Result` with a success value
  error, // constructs a `Result` with an error
  of, // constructs a `Result` from a provided function. Ok if it returns, Error if it throws.
  of_async, // constructs a `Result` from an async function. Ok if it resolves, Error if it rejects or throws
};
```

# Example usage

Sometimes an operation involves a series of steps, any of which may fail. This sort of operation often results in repetitive try-catch blocks that are tedious to write and challenging to read. It requires more code, which increases the likelihood of bugs being introduced and increases the maintenance burden.

Consider this exaggerated example calculation where any of a series of steps may fail. It could benefit from `Result`'s monadic interface to simplify error handling.

```ts
function parseNumber(str: string): number {
  const num = Number(str);
  if (isNaN(num)) {
    throw new Error(`Invalid number: ${str}`);
  }
  return num;
}

function divide(a: number, b: number): number {
  if (b === 0) {
    throw new Error("Division by zero");
  }
  return a / b;
}

function sqrt(n: number): number {
  if (n < 0) {
    throw new Error("Cannot take square root of negative number");
  }
  return Math.sqrt(n);
}

function calculateExpression(
  numeratorStr: string,
  denominatorStr: string,
): number | null {
  try {
    const numerator = parseNumber(numeratorStr);
    try {
      const denominator = parseNumber(denominatorStr);
      try {
        const quotient = divide(numerator, denominator);
        try {
          const result = sqrt(quotient);
          return result;
        } catch (sqrtError) {
          console.error("Square root error:", sqrtError.message);
          return null;
        }
      } catch (divisionError) {
        console.error("Division error:", divisionError.message);
        return null;
      }
    } catch (denominatorError) {
      console.error("Denominator parse error:", denominatorError.message);
      return null;
    }
  } catch (numeratorError) {
    console.error("Numerator parse error:", numeratorError.message);
    return null;
  }
}

const result = calculateExpression("16", "4");
if (result !== null) {
  console.log("Result:", result);
} else {
  console.log("Calculation failed");
}
```

At every step, the code needs to perform error handling with try-catch blocks. Out of 30 lines of code, ~16 of them are error handling boilerplate. Every function called by `calculateExpression` can throw exceptions, and the client code must handle the possibility of receiving `null`. That's a lot of boilerplate code, and it comes with some serious downsides:

- verbose code obscures the core logic
- more code means more opportunities for bugs
- At any step it's possible to not handle an error, and tooling won't tell you it was missed!

Let's take a look at how this code could be implemented using `Result` instead of exceptions to represent failure. Result comes with interfaces for operating on the result, whether or not it succeeds. This makes it straightforward to chain operations and handle errors. The type system will also ensure it is checked for errors, making it harder to miss handling them.

```ts
function parseNumber(str: string): Result<number, Error> {
  const num = Number(str);
  return isNaN(num)
    ? result.error(new Error(`Invalid number: ${str}`))
    : result.ok(num);
}

function divide(a: number, b: number): Result<number, Error> {
  return b === 0
    ? result.error(new Error("Division by zero"))
    : result.ok(a / b);
}

function sqrt(n: number): Result<number, Error> {
  return n < 0
    ? result.error(new Error("Cannot take square root of negative number"))
    : result.ok(Math.sqrt(n));
}

function calculateExpression(
  numeratorStr: string,
  denominatorStr: string,
): Result<number, Error> {
  return parseNumber(numeratorStr)
    .and_then((numerator) =>
      parseNumber(denominatorStr).and_then((denominator) =>
        divide(numerator, denominator),
      ),
    )
    .and_then((quotient) => sqrt(quotient));
}

const computation = calculateExpression("16", "4");
computation.match({
  on_ok: (value) => console.log("Result:", value),
  on_error: (error) => console.log("Calculation failed:", error.message),
});
```

Similar to the version using exceptions, each step of the operation will only be run if the previous step succeeded. `Result`'s `.and_then()` method encapsulates the error check and only runs the provided function if a value is present. This made it possible to implement the `calculateExpression` using `Result` in 12 lines of code, whereas before it required 30 lines.

Commit message:

Add retry and retry_async functions to Result type (#5)

src/result/readme.md, after:

# Result

The `Result` type is a monadic alternative to throwing exceptions for expressing the result of operations that may succeed or fail. It provides a way to handle errors in an expressive and type-safe manner without relying on exception handling.

Code that throws exceptions when operations fail has a couple shortcomings:

1. It forces all calling code to handle exceptions, even when they may not be equipped to do so meaningfully.
2. Exception types are not captured in function signatures, making it difficult to know what errors a function might produce.
3. Stack unwinding from exceptions can be expensive and makes control flow less predictable.

`Result` addresses these issues by wrapping either a successful value or an error in a way that makes error handling explicit and composable. It provides expressive methods that encapsulate error checking, making it possible to write robust code that gracefully handles failure cases without repetitive try-catch blocks.

# The `Result` interface

`Result` is fully documented inline. The best way to view its documentation is in your editor, while using it. You can also view the documentation for each method [in this source code](./result.ts).

Here's an overview of the `Result` interface:

```ts result.ts
// Interface definition that can be used for type annotations.
export interface Result<ResultType, ErrorType extends Error> {
  // Check if the result contains an error. If it does, it will be widened to include an `error` property.
  is_error(): this is ErrorResult<ErrorType>;

  // Check if the result contains a value. If it does, it will be widened to include a `value` property.
  is_ok(): this is OkResult<ResultType>;

  // If the result is Ok, return the value. Otherwise, return the provided default value.
  value_or(value_if_error: ResultType): ResultType;

  // If the result is Error, return the error. Otherwise, return the provided default error.
  error_or(error_if_ok: ErrorType): ErrorType;

  // If the result is Ok, map the value and return a new Result with the mapped value.
  // Otherwise, return the error unchanged.
  map<NewResultType>(
    fn: (value: ResultType) => NewResultType,
  ): Result<NewResultType, ErrorType>;

  // If the result is Error, map the error and return a new Result with the mapped error.
  // Otherwise, return the value unchanged.
  map_err<NewErrorType extends Error>(
    fn: (error: ErrorType) => NewErrorType,
  ): Result<ResultType, NewErrorType>;


  // Pattern match against the result, returning the result of the appropriate callback.
  match<OKMatchResultType, ErrorMatchResultType>({
    on_ok,
    on_error,
  }: {
    on_ok: (value: ResultType) => OKMatchResultType;
    on_error: (error: ErrorType) => ErrorMatchResultType;
  }): OKMatchResultType | ErrorMatchResultType;

  // If this Result is Ok, apply the function to the value. Otherwise, return the error unchanged.
  and_then<NewResultType>(
    fn: (value: ResultType) => Result<NewResultType, ErrorType>,
  ): Result<NewResultType, ErrorType>;

  // Provide an alternative Result if this Result is Error.
  or_else<NewErrorType extends Error>(
    fn: (error: ErrorType) => Result<ResultType, NewErrorType>,
  ): Result<ResultType, NewErrorType>;

  // Iterator support - yields the value if Ok, nothing if Error.
  [Symbol.iterator](): Generator<ResultType, void, unknown>;
}

export const result = {
  ok, // constructs a `Result` with a success value
  error, // constructs a `Result` with an error
  of, // constructs a `Result` from a provided function. Ok if it returns, Error if it throws.
  of_async, // constructs a `Result` from an async function. Ok if it resolves, Error if it rejects or throws
  retry, // executes a Result-returning function multiple times until success or retry limit is reached
  retry_async, // executes an async Result-returning function multiple times until success or retry limit is reached
};
```

# Example usage

Sometimes an operation involves a series of steps, any of which may fail. This sort of operation often results in repetitive try-catch blocks that are tedious to write and challenging to read. It requires more code, which increases the likelihood of bugs being introduced and increases the maintenance burden.

Consider this exaggerated example calculation where any of a series of steps may fail. It could benefit from `Result`'s monadic interface to simplify error handling.

```ts
function parseNumber(str: string): number {
  const num = Number(str);
  if (isNaN(num)) {
    throw new Error(`Invalid number: ${str}`);
  }
  return num;
}

function divide(a: number, b: number): number {
  if (b === 0) {
    throw new Error("Division by zero");
  }
  return a / b;
}

function sqrt(n: number): number {
  if (n < 0) {
    throw new Error("Cannot take square root of negative number");
  }
  return Math.sqrt(n);
}

function calculateExpression(
  numeratorStr: string,
  denominatorStr: string,
): number | null {
  try {
    const numerator = parseNumber(numeratorStr);
    try {
      const denominator = parseNumber(denominatorStr);
      try {
        const quotient = divide(numerator, denominator);
        try {
          const result = sqrt(quotient);
          return result;
        } catch (sqrtError) {
          console.error("Square root error:", sqrtError.message);
          return null;
        }
      } catch (divisionError) {
        console.error("Division error:", divisionError.message);
        return null;
      }
    } catch (denominatorError) {
      console.error("Denominator parse error:", denominatorError.message);
      return null;
    }
  } catch (numeratorError) {
    console.error("Numerator parse error:", numeratorError.message);
    return null;
  }
}

const result = calculateExpression("16", "4");
if (result !== null) {
  console.log("Result:", result);
} else {
  console.log("Calculation failed");
}
```

At every step, the code needs to perform error handling with try-catch blocks. Out of 30 lines of code, ~16 of them are error handling boilerplate. Every function called by `calculateExpression` can throw exceptions, and the client code must handle the possibility of receiving `null`. That's a lot of boilerplate code, and it comes with some serious downsides:

- verbose code obscures the core logic
- more code means more opportunities for bugs
- At any step it's possible to not handle an error, and tooling won't tell you it was missed!

Let's take a look at how this code could be implemented using `Result` instead of exceptions to represent failure. Result comes with interfaces for operating on the result, whether or not it succeeds. This makes it straightforward to chain operations and handle errors. The type system will also ensure it is checked for errors, making it harder to miss handling them.

```ts
function parseNumber(str: string): Result<number, Error> {
  const num = Number(str);
  return isNaN(num)
    ? result.error(new Error(`Invalid number: ${str}`))
    : result.ok(num);
}

function divide(a: number, b: number): Result<number, Error> {
  return b === 0
    ? result.error(new Error("Division by zero"))
    : result.ok(a / b);
}

function sqrt(n: number): Result<number, Error> {
  return n < 0
    ? result.error(new Error("Cannot take square root of negative number"))
    : result.ok(Math.sqrt(n));
}

function calculateExpression(
  numeratorStr: string,
  denominatorStr: string,
): Result<number, Error> {
  return parseNumber(numeratorStr)
    .and_then((numerator) =>
      parseNumber(denominatorStr).and_then((denominator) =>
        divide(numerator, denominator),
      ),
    )
    .and_then((quotient) => sqrt(quotient));
}

const computation = calculateExpression("16", "4");
computation.match({
  on_ok: (value) => console.log("Result:", value),
  on_error: (error) => console.log("Calculation failed:", error.message),
});
```

Similar to the version using exceptions, each step of the operation will only be run if the previous step succeeded. `Result`'s `.and_then()` method encapsulates the error check and only runs the provided function if a value is present. This made it possible to implement the `calculateExpression` using `Result` in 12 lines of code, whereas before it required 30 lines.
